---
# This file is licensed under the MIT License (MIT) available on
# http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT.
# Text originally from Bitcoin Core project
# Metadata and small formatting changes from Bitcoin.org project

## Please see _releases/0.10.0.md for a release template
required_version: 0.3.24
optional_date: 2011-07-08
title: Bitcoin version 0.3.24 released
---
[Full announcement (including signatures)](http://sourceforge.net/mailarchive/message.php?msg_id=27771039)

Bitcoin v0.3.24 is now available for download at
<http://sourceforge.net/projects/bitcoin/files/Bitcoin/bitcoin-0.3.24/>

This is another bug fix release.  We had hoped to have wallet encryption ready for release, but more urgent fixes for existing clients were needed -- most notably block download problems were getting severe.  Wallet encryption is ready for testing at <https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/352> for the git-savvy, and hopefully will follow shortly in the next release, v0.4.

Notable fixes in v0.3.24, and the main reasons for this release:

* Block downloads were failing or taking unreasonable amounts of time to complete, because the increased size of the block chain was bumping up against some earlier buffer-size DoS limits.  
* Fix crash caused by loss/lack of network connection.  

Notable changes in v0.3.24:

* DNS seeding enabled by default.  
* UPNP enabled by default in the GUI client.  The percentage of bitcoin clients that accept incoming connections is quite small, and that is a problem.  This should help.  bitcoind, and unofficial builds, are unchanged (though we encourage use of "-upnp" to help the network!).  
* Initial unit testing framework.  Bitcoin sorely needs automated tests, and this is a beginning.  Contributions welcome.  
* Internal wallet code cleanup.  While invisible to an end user, this change provides the basis for v0.4's wallet encryption.  
